****************************************************************
:f:mod:`spral_ssids` - Sparse Symmetric Indefinite Direct Solver
****************************************************************
.. f:module:: spral_ssids
   :synopsis: Sparse Symmetric Indefinite Direct Solver

This package solves one or more sets of :math:`n\times n`
sparse **symmetric** equations  :math:`AX = B` using a multifrontal method on an
**NVIDIA GPU**.
The following cases are covered:

1. :math:`A` is **indefinite**.
SSIDS computes the sparse factorization

.. math::

   A =  PLD(PL)^T

where :math:`P` is a permutation matrix, :math:`L` is unit lower triangular,
and :math:`D` is block diagonal with blocks of size :math:`1 \times 1`
and :math:`2 \times 2`.

2. :math:`A` is **positive definite**.
SSIDS computes the **sparse Cholesky factorization**

.. math::

   A =  PL(PL)^T

where :math:`P` is a permutation matrix and :math:`L` is lower triangular.
*However, as SSIDS is designed primarily for indefinite
systems, this may be slower than a dedicated Cholesky solver.*

SSIDS returns bit-compatible results.

An option exists to scale the matrix. In this case, the factorization of
the scaled matrix  :math:`\overline{A} = S A S` is computed,
where :math:`S` is a diagonal scaling matrix.

=====================
Major version history
=====================

2014-03-17 Version 1.0.0
    Initial release

==============
Usage overview
==============

Calling sequences
-----------------

Access to the package requires a USE statement

| use spral_ssids

The following procedures are available to the user:

-  ssids\_analyse() accepts the matrix data in compressed sparse column
   format and optionally checks it for duplicates and out-of-range
   entries. The user may supply an elimination order; otherwise one is
   generated. Using this elimination order, ssids\_analyse() analyses
   the sparsity pattern of the matrix and prepares the data structures
   for the factorization.

-  ssids\_analyse\_coord() is an alternative to ssids\_analyse() that
   may be used if the user has the matrix data in coordinate format.
   Again, the user may supply an elimination order; otherwise one is
   generated. ssids\_analyse\_coord() checks the matrix data for
   duplicates and out-of-range entries, stores it in compressed sparse
   column format and then proceeds in the same way as ssids\_analyse().

-  ssids\_factor() uses the data structures set up by ssids\_analyse()
   to compute a sparse factorization. More than one call to
   ssids\_factor() may follow a call to ssids\_analyse() (allowing more
   than one matrix with the same sparsity pattern but different
   numerical values to be factorized without multiple calls to
   ssids\_analyse()). An option exists to scale the matrix.

-  ssids\_solve() uses the computed factors generated by ssids\_factor()
   to solve systems :math:`{AX= B}` for one or more right-hand sides
   :math:`B`. Multiple calls to ssids\_solve() may follow a call to
   ssids\_factor(). An option is available to perform a partial
   solution.

-  ssids\_free() should be called after all other calls are complete for
   a problem (including after an error return that does not allow the
   computation to continue). It frees memory referenced by components of
   the derived types. This routine also allows created by either
   ssids\_analyse() or ssids\_factorize() to be freed separately.

In addition, the following routines may be called:

-  ssids\_enquire\_posdef() may be called in the positive-definite case
   to obtain the pivots used.

-  ssids\_enquire\_indef() may be called in the indefinite case to
   obtain the pivot sequence used by the factorization and the entries
   of :math:`{D}^{-1}`.

-  ssids\_alter() may be called in the indefinite case to alter the
   entries of :math:`{D}^{-1}`. Note that this means that
   :math:`PLD(PL)^T` is no longer a factorization of :math:`A`.

Derived types
-------------

For each problem, the user must employ the derived types defined by the
package to declare scalars of the types ssids\_options, ssids\_inform,
ssids\_akeep, and ssids\_fkeep. The following pseudo-code illustrates
this.

::

          use spral_ssids
          ...
          type (ssids_options) :: options
          type (ssids_inform) :: inform
          type (ssids_akeep) :: akeep
          type (ssids_fkeep) :: fkeep
          ...

The components of ssids\_options and ssids\_inform are explained in
Sections [ssids:type:options] and [ssids:type:inform]. The components of
ssids\_akeep and ssids\_fkeep are used to pass data between the
subroutines of the package and must not be altered by the user.

Achieving bit-compatibility
---------------------------

Care has been taken to ensure bit-compatibility is achieved using this
solver. That is, consecutive runs with the same data on the same machine
produces exactly the same solution.

Optional arguments
------------------

We use square brackets to indicate *optional* arguments. In each call,
optional arguments follow the argument inform. Since we reserve the
right to add additional optional arguments in future releases of the
code, **we strongly recommend that all optional arguments be called by
keyword, not by position**.

Integer, real and package types
-------------------------------

INTEGER denotes default INTEGER and INTEGER(long) denotes
INTEGER(kind=selected\_int\_kind(18)).

denotes double precision real. We also use the term **package type** to
mean the same.

Data formats
------------

.. math::

   \left( \begin{array}{ccccc}
            1.1 & 2.2 &     & 3.3 &     \\
            2.2 &     & 4.4 &     &     \\
                & 4.4 & 5.5 &     & 6.6 \\
            3.3 &     &     & 7.7 & 8.8 \\
                &     & 6.6 & 8.8 & 9.9
         \end{array} \right)

Compressed Sparse Column (CSC) Format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This standard data format consists of the following data:

::

       integer                   :: n      ! size of matrix
       integer, size(n+1)        :: ptr    ! column pointers
       integer, size(ptr(n+1)-1) :: row    ! row indices
       real,    size(ptr(n+1)-1) :: val    ! numerical values

Non-zero matrix entries are ordered by increasing column index and
stored in the arrays ``row(:)`` and ``val(:)`` such that ``row(k)``
holds the row number and ``val(k)`` holds the value of the ``k``-th
entry. The ``ptr(:)`` array stores column pointers such that ``ptr(i)``
is the position in ``row(:)`` and ``val(:)`` of the first entry in the
``i``-th column, and ``ptr(n+1)`` is one more than the total number of
entries. Entries that are zero, including those on the diagonal, need
not be specified.

If this format is used, ``SSIDS`` requires only the lower triangular
entries of :math:`A`, and there should be no duplicate entries. If the
``check`` argument to ``ssids_analyse()`` is ``.true.``, out-of-range
entries (including those in the upper triangle) will be discarded and
any duplicates will be summed.

To illustrate the CSC format, the following arrays describe the matrix
shown in Figure [ssids:format eg].

::

       n = 5
       ptr(1:6) = (/ 1,             4,   5,        7,        9,    10 /)
       row(1:9) = (/ 1,   2,   4,   3,   3,   5,   4,   5,   5 /)
       val(1:9) = (/ 1.1, 2.2, 3.3, 4.4, 5.5, 6.6, 7.7, 8.8, 9.9 /)

Coordinate Format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This standard data format consists of the following data:

::

       integer           :: n     ! size of matrix
       integer           :: ne    ! number of non-zero entries
       integer, size(ne) :: row   ! row indices
       integer, size(ne) :: col   ! column indices
       real,    size(ne) :: val   ! numerical values

The arrays should be set such that the ``k``-th entry is in row
``row(k)`` and column ``col(k)`` with value ``val(k)``. Entries that are
zero, including those on the diagonal, need not be specified.

If this format is used, ``SSIDS`` requires that each entry of :math:`A`
should be present **only** in the lower *or* upper triangular part.
Entries present in both will be summed, as will any duplicate entries.
Out-of-range entries are ignored.

To illustrate the coordinate format, the following arrays describe the
matrix shown in Figure [ssids:format eg].

::

       n = 5
       ne = 9
       row(1:9) = (/ 1,   2,   3,   4,   3,   5,   4,   5,   5 /)
       col(1:9) = (/ 1,   1,   2,   1,   3,   3,   4,   4,   5 /)
       val(1:9) = (/ 1.1, 2.2, 4.4, 3.3, 5.5, 6.6, 7.7, 8.8, 9.9 /)

=================
Basic Subroutines
=================

Note: For the most efficient use of the routine, CSC format should be used
without checking.

.. f:subroutine:: ssids_analyse(check,n,ptr,row,akeep,options,inform[,order,val])

   Perform the analyse (symbolic) phase of the factorization for a matrix
   supplied in :doc:`CSC format<csc_format>`. The resulting symbolic factors
   stored in :f:type:`akeep` should be passed unaltered in the following call to
   ssids_factor().

   :p logical check [in]: if true, matrix data is checked. Out-of-range entries
      are dropped and duplicate entries are summed.
   :p integer n [in]: number of columns in :math:`A`.
   :p integer ptr(n+1) [in]: column pointers for :math:`A` (see :doc:`CSC format<csc_format>`).
   :p integer row(ptr(n+1)-1) [in]: row indices for :math:`A` (see :doc:`CSC format<csc_format>`).
   :p ssids_akeep akeep [out]: returns symbolic factorization, to be passed unchanged to subsequent routines.
   :p ssids_options options [in]: specifies algorithm options to be used (see [ssids:type:option]).
   :p ssids_inform inform [out]: returns information about the execution of the routine (see [ssids:type:inform]).
   :o integer order(n) [inout]: on entry a user-supplied ordering (options%ordering=0). On return, the actual ordering used (if present).
   :o real val(ptr(n+1)-1) [in]: non-zero values for :math:`A` (see :doc:`CSC format<csc_format>`). Only used if a matching-based ordering is requested.

   **Note:** If a user-supplied ordering is used, it may be altered by this
   routine, with the altered version returned in order(:). This version will be
   equivalent to the original ordering, except that some supernodes may have
   been amalgamated, a topographic ordering may have been applied to the tree
   and the order of columns within a supernode may have been adjusted to improve
   cache locality.

.. f:subroutine:: ssids_analyse_coord(n,ne,row,col,akeep,options,inform[,order,val])

   :p integer n [in]: number of columns in :math:`A`.
   :p integer ne [in]: number of non-zero entries in :math:`A`.
   :p integer row(ne) [in]: row indices for :math:`A` (see :doc:`Coordinate format<coord_format>`).
   :p integer col(ne) [in]: column indices for :math:`A` (see :doc:`Coordinate format<coord_format>`).
   :p ssids_akeep akeep [out]: returns symbolic factorization, to be passed unchanged to subsequent routines.
   :p ssids_options options [in]: specifies algorithm options to be used (see [ssids:type:option]).
   :p ssids_inform inform [out]: returns information about the execution of the routine (see [ssids:type:inform]).
   :o integer order(n) [inout]: on entry a user-supplied ordering (options%ordering=0). On return, the actual ordering used (if present).
   :o real val(ne) [in]: non-zero values for :math:`A` (see :doc:`Coordinate format<coord_format>`). Only used if a matching-based ordering is requested.

   **Note:** If a user-supplied ordering is used, it may be altered by this
   routine, with the altered version returned in order(:). This version will be
   equivalent to the original ordering, except that some supernodes may have
   been amalgamated, a topographic ordering may have been applied to the tree
   and the order of columns within a supernode may have been adjusted to improve
   cache locality.

.. f:subroutine::  ssids_factor(posdef,val,akeep,fkeep,options,inform[,scale,ptr,row])

   :p logical posdef [in]: true if matrix is matrix is positive-definite
   :p real val(*) [in]: non-zero values for :math:`A` in same format as for
      the call to :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` or :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`.
   :p ssids_akeep [in]: symbolic factorization returned by preceding call to
      :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` or :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`.
   :p ssids_fkeep [inout]: returns numeric factorization, to be passed unchanged
      to subsequent routines.
   :p ssids_options options [in]: specifies algorithm options to be used
      (see [ssids:type:option]).
   :p ssids_inform inform [out]: returns information about the execution of the
      routine (see [ssids:type:inform]).
   :o real scale(n) [inout]: diagonal scaling. scale(i) contains entry
      :math:`S_ii` of :math:`S`. Must be supplied by user if
      options%scaling=0 (user-supplied scaling). On exit, return scaling used.
   :o integer ptr(n+1) [in]: column pointers for :math:`A`, only required if
      :f:type:`akeep` was obtained by running :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` with
      :f:type:`check` =.true., in which case it must be unchanged since that
      call.
   :o integer row(ptr(n+1)-1) [in]: row indices for :math:`A`, only required if
      :f:type:`akeep` was obtained by running :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` with
      :f:type:`check` =.true., in which case it must be unchanged since that
      call.

.. f:subroutine:: ssids_solve(x,akeep,fkeep,options,inform[,job])
   
   Solve (for a single right-hand side) one of the following equations:

   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | `job`         | Equation solved          |
   +===============+==========================+
   | 0 (or absent) | :math:`Ax=b`             |
   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | 1             | :math:`PLx=Sb`           |
   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | 2             | :math:`Dx=b`             |
   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | 3             | :math:`(PL)^TS^{-1}x=b`  |
   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | 4             | :math:`D(PL)^TS^{-1}x=b` |
   +---------------+--------------------------+

   Recall :math:`A` has been factorized as either:
   
   * :math:`SAS = (PL)(PL)^T~` (positive-definite case); or
   * :math:`SAS = (PL)D(PL)^T` (indefinite case).

   :p real x(n) [in]: right-hand side :math:`b` on entry, solution :math:`x`
      on exit.
   :p ssids_akeep akeep [in]: symbolic factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` or :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`.
   :p ssids_fkeep fkeep [in]: numeric factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_factor()`.
   :p ssids_options options [in]: specifies algorithm options to be used
      (see [ssids:type:option]).
   :p ssids_inform inform [out]: returns information about the execution of the
      routine (see [ssids:type:inform]).
   :o integer job [in]: specifies equation to solve, as per above table.

.. f:subroutine:: ssids_solve(nrhs,x,ldx,akeep,fkeep,options,inform[,job])
   
   Solve (for multiple right-hand sides) one of the following equations:

   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | `job`         | Equation solved          |
   +===============+==========================+
   | 0 (or absent) | :math:`AX=B`             |
   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | 1             | :math:`PLX=SB`           |
   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | 2             | :math:`DX=B`             |
   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | 3             | :math:`(PL)^TS^{-1}X=B`  |
   +---------------+--------------------------+
   | 4             | :math:`D(PL)^TS^{-1}X=B` |
   +---------------+--------------------------+

   Recall :math:`A` has been factorized as either:
   
   * :math:`SAS = (PL)(PL)^T~` (positive-definite case); or
   * :math:`SAS = (PL)D(PL)^T` (indefinite case).

   :p integer nrhs [in]: number of right-hand sides.
   :p real x(ldx,nrhs) [inout]: right-hand sides :math:`B` on entry,
      solutions :math:`X` on exit.
   :p integer ldx [in]: leading dimension of :f:type:`x`.
   :p ssids_akeep akeep [in]: symbolic factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` or :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`.
   :p ssids_fkeep fkeep [in]: numeric factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_factor()`.
   :p ssids_options options [in]: specifies algorithm options to be used
      (see [ssids:type:option]).
   :p ssids_inform inform [out]: returns information about the execution of the
      routine (see [ssids:type:inform]).
   :o integer job [in]: specifies equation to solve, as per above table.

.. f:subroutine:: ssids_free([akeep,fkeep,]cuda_error)

   Frees memory and resources associated with :f:type:`akeep` and/or
   :f:type:`fkeep`, at least one of which must be present.

   :p ssids_akeep akeep [inout]: symbolic factors to be freed.
   :p ssids_fkeep fkeep [inout]: numeric factors to be freed.
   :p integer cuda_error [out]: 0 on success, or a CUDA error code on failure.

.. warning:

   This routine must be called by the user. Merely deallocating :f:type:`akeep`
   or :f:type:`fkeep`, or allowing them to go out of scope will result in memory
   leaks. :f:type:`akeep` should only be deallocated after all associated
   numeric factorizations :f:type:`fkeep` have been freed.

====================
Advanced subroutines
====================

.. f:subroutine:: ssids_enquire_posdef(akeep,fkeep,options,inform,d)

   Return the diagonal entries of the Cholesky factor.

   :p ssids_akeep akeep [in]: symbolic factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` or :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`.
   :p ssids_fkeep fkeep [in]: numeric factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_factor()`.
   :p ssids_options options [in]: specifies algorithm options to be used
      (see [ssids:type:option]).
   :p ssids_inform inform [out]: returns information about the execution of the
      routine (see [ssids:type:inform]).
   :p real d (n) [out]: returns the diagonal of :math:`L`. d(i) stores the
      entry :math:`L_{ii}`.

.. f:subroutine:: ssids_enquire_indef(akeep,fkeep,options,inform[,piv_order,d])

   Return the pivot order and/or values of :math:`D` of the Symmetric Indefinite
   Factorization.

   :p ssids_akeep akeep [in]: symbolic factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` or :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`.
   :p ssids_fkeep fkeep [in]: numeric factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_factor()`.
   :p ssids_options options [in]: specifies algorithm options to be used
      (see [ssids:type:option]).
   :p ssids_inform inform [out]: returns information about the execution of the
      routine (see [ssids:type:inform]).
   :o integer piv_order (n) [out]: returns the pivot order.
      :math:`|\,\texttt{piv\_order(i)}|` gives the position of variable
      :math:`i` in the pivot order. The sign will be positive if :math:`i` is a
      :math:`1\times1` pivot, and negative if :math:`i` is
      part of a :math:`2 \times 2` pivot.
   :o real d (2,n) [out]: returns the :math:`2\times2` block diagonal of
      :math:`D`. d(1,i) stores :math:`D_{ii}` and d(2,i) stores
      :math:`D_{(i+1)i}`.

.. f:subroutine:: ssids_alter(d,akeep,fkeep,options,inform)

   Alter the entries of the diagonal factor :math:`D` for a symmetric indefinite
   factorization. The pivot order remains the same.

   :p real d (2,n) [in]: New entries of :math:`D`.
      d(1,i) stores :math:`D_{ii}` and d(2,i) stores :math:`D_{(i+1)i}`.
   :p ssids_akeep akeep [in]: symbolic factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` or :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`.
   :p ssids_fkeep fkeep [in]: numeric factorization returned by preceding
      call to :f:subr:`ssids_factor()`.
   :p ssids_options options [in]: specifies algorithm options to be used
      (see [ssids:type:option]).
   :p ssids_inform inform [out]: returns information about the execution of the
      routine (see [ssids:type:inform]).

   **Note:** This routine is not compatabile with the option
   ``options.presolve=1``.

=============
Derived types
=============

.. f:type:: ssids_options

   The derived data type ssids\_options is used to specify the options
   used within ``SSIDS``. The components, that are automatically given
   default values in the definition of the type, are:

   :f integer print_level [default=0]: the level of printing. The different
      levels are:

      +-----+-------------------------------------------------+
      | < 0 | No printing.                                    |
      +-----+-------------------------------------------------+
      | = 0 | Error and warning messages only.                |
      +-----+-------------------------------------------------+
      | = 1 | As 0, plus basic diagnostic printing.           |
      +-----+-------------------------------------------------+
      | > 1 | As 1, plus some additional diagnostic printing. |
      +-----+-------------------------------------------------+

   :f integer unit_diagnostics [default=6]: Fortran unit number for
      diagnostics printing. Printing is suppressed if <0.
   :f integer unit_error [default=6]: Fortran unit number for printing of
      error messages. Printing is suppressed if <0.
   :f integer unit_warning [default=6]: Fortran unit number for printing of
      warning messages. Printing is suppressed if <0.
   :f integer ordering [default=1]: Ordering method to use in analyse phase:

      +-------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
      | 0           | User-supplied ordering is used (`order` argument to     |
      |             | :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` or                            |
      |             | :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`).                       |
      +-------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
      | 1 (default) | METIS ordering with default settings.                   |
      +-------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
      | 2           | Matching-based elimination ordering is computed (the    |
      |             | Hungarian algorithm is used to identify large           |
      |             | off-diagonal entries. A restricted METIS ordering is    |
      |             | then used that forces these on to the subdiagonal).     |
      |             |                                                         |
      |             | **Note:** This option should only be chosen for         |
      |             | indefinite systems. A scaling is also computed that may |
      |             | be used in :f:subr:`ssids_factor()` (see %scaling       |
      |             | below).                                                 |
      +-------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

   :f integer nemin [default=8]: supernode amalgamation threshold. Two
      neighbours in the elimination tree are merged if they both involve fewer
      than nemin eliminations. The default is used if nemin<1.
   :f integer scaling [default=0]: scaling algorithm to use:

      +---------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
      | <=0 (default) | No scaling (if ``scale(:)`` is not present on call to |
      |               | :f:subr:`ssids_factor()`, or user-supplied scaling (if|
      |               | ``scale(:)`` is present).                             |
      +---------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
      | =1            | Compute using weighted bipartite matching via the     |
      |               | Hungarian Algorithm (``MC64`` algorithm).             |
      +---------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
      | =2            | Compute using a weighted bipartite matching via the   |
      |               | Auction Algorithm (may be lower quality than that     |
      |               | computed using the Hungarian Algorithm, but can be    |
      |               | considerably faster).                                 |
      +---------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
      | =3            | Use matching-based ordering generated during the      |
      |               | analyse phase using options%ordering=2. The scaling   |
      |               | will be the same as that generated with %scaling= 1   |
      |               | if the matrix values have not changed. This option    |
      |               | will generate an error if a matching-based ordering   |
      |               | was not used during analysis.                         |
      +---------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
      | >=4           | Compute using the norm-equilibration algorithm of     |
      |               | Ruiz.                                                 |
      +---------------+-------------------------------------------------------+

   :f logical action [default=.true.]: continue factorization of singular matrix
      on discovery of zero pivot if true (a warning is issued), or abort if
      false.
   :f real u [default=0.01]: relative pivot threshold used in symmetric
      indefinite case. Values outside of the range :math:`[0,0.5]` are treated
      as the closest value in that range.
   :f logical use_gpu_solve [default=.true.]: use GPU for solve phase if true,
      or CPU if false. 
   :f integer presolve [default=0]: perform presolve operations during factorize
      to accelerate solves. It may take the following values:

      +-------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
      | 0 (default) | Minimal work is performed during :f:subr:`ssids_factor()`|
      |             | to prepare for the solve.                                |
      +-------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
      | 1           | The explicit inverse of the                              |
      |             | :math:`\mathrm{nelim}\times\mathrm{nelim}` block in each |
      |             | supernode is precalculated during                        |
      |             | :f:subr:`ssids_factor()` (where ``nelim`` is the number  |
      |             | of variables eliminated at that supernode). As the matrix|
      |             | :math:`L` is overwritten, the routine                    |
      |             | :f:subr:`ssids_alter() cannot be used.                   |
      |             |                                                          |
      |             | This option requires %use_gpu_solve=.true.               |
      +-------------+----------------------------------------------------------+

.. f:type:: ssids_inform

   Used to return information about the progress and needs of the algorithm.

   :f integer flag: exit status of the algorithm (see table below).
   :f integer matrix_dup: number of duplicate entries encountered (if
      :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` called with check=true, or any call to
      :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`).
   :f integer matrix_missing_diag: number of diagonal entries without an
      explicit value (if :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` called with check=true, or
      any call to :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`).
   :f integer matrix_outrange: number of out-of-range entries encountered (if
      :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` called with check=true, or any call to
      :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`).
   :f integer matrix_rank: (estimated) rank (structural after analyse phase,
      numerical after factorize phase).
   :f integer maxdepth: maximum depth of the assembly tree.
   :f integer maxfront: maximum front size (without pivoting after analyse
      phase, with pivoting after factorize phase).
   :f integer num_delay: number of delayed pivots. That is, the total
      number of fully-summed variables that were passed to the father node
      because of stability considerations. If a variable is passed further
      up the tree, it will be counted again.
   :f integer(long) num_factor: number of entries in :math:`L` (without pivoting
      after analyse phase, with pivoting after factorize phase).
   :f integer(long) num_flops: number of floating-point operations for Cholesky
      factorization (indefinte needs slightly more). Without pivoting after
      analyse phase, with pivoting after factorize phase.
   :f integer num_neg: number of negative eigenvalues of the matrix :math:`D`
      after factorize phase.
   :f integer num_sup: number of supernodes in assembly tree.
   :f integer num_two: number of :math:`2 \times 2` pivots used by the
      factorization (i.e. in the matrix :math:`D`).
   :f integer stat: Fortran allocation status parameter in event of allocation
      error (0 otherwise).
   :f integer cublas_error: CUBLAS error code in the event of a CUBLAS error
      (0 otherwise).
   :f integer cublas_error: CUDA error code in the event of a CUDA error
      (0 otherwise). Note that due to asynchronous execution, CUDA errors may 
      not be reported by the call that caused them.

   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | inform%flag | Return status                                               |
   +=============+=============================================================+
   | 0           | Success.                                                    |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -1          | Error in sequence of calls (may be caused by failure of a   |
   |             | preceding call).                                            |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -2          | n<0 or ne<1.                                                |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -3          | Error in ptr(:).                                            |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -4          | CSC format: All variable indices in one or more columns are |
   |             | out-of-range.                                               |
   |             |                                                             |
   |             | Coordinate format: All entries are out-of-range.            |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -5          | Matrix is singular and options%action=.false.               |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -6          | Matrix found not to be positive definite.                   |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -7          | ptr(:) and/or row(:) not present, but required as           |
   |             | :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` was called with check=.false,.    |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -8          | options%ordering out of range, or options%ordering=0 and    |
   |             | order parameter not provided or not a valid permutation.    |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -9          | options%ordering=-2 but val(:) was not supplied.            |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -10         | ldx<n or nrhs<1.                                            |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -11         | job is out-of-range.                                        |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -12         | The combination of options%use_gpu_solve and                |
   |             | options%presolve are not compatible with the requested      |
   |             | operation.                                                  |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -13         | Called :f:subr:`ssids_enquire_posdef()` on indefinite       |
   |             | factorization.                                              |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -14         | Called :f:subr:`ssids_enquire_indef()` on positive-definite |
   |             | factorization.                                              |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -15         | options%scaling=3 but a matching-based ordering was not     |
   |             | performed during analyse phase.                             |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -50         | Allocation error. If available, the stat parameter is       |
   |             | returned in inform%stat.                                    |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -51         | CUDA error. The CUDA error return value is returned in      |
   |             | inform%cuda_error.                                          |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | -52         | CUBLAS error. The CUBLAS error return value is returned in  |
   |             | inform%cublas_error.                                        |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | +1          | Out-of-range variable indices found and ignored in input    |
   |             | data. inform%matrix_outrange is set to the number of such   |
   |             | entries.                                                    |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | +2          | Duplicate entries found and summed in input data.           |
   |             | inform%matrix_dup is set to the number of such entries.     |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | +3          | Combination of +1 and +2.                                   |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | +4          | One or more diagonal entries of :math:`A` are missing.      |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | +5          | Combination of +4 and +1 or +2.                             |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | +6          | Matrix is found be (structurally) singular during analyse   |
   |             | phase. This will overwrite any of the above warning flags.  |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | +7          | Matrix is found to be singular during factorize phase.      |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
   | +8          | Matching-based scaling found as side-effect of              |
   |             | matching-based ordering ignored                             |
   |             | (consider setting options%scaling=3).                       |
   +-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+

=======
Example
=======

Suppose we wish to factorize the matrix

.. math::

   A = \left(\begin{array}{ccccc}
      2. & 1.                \\
      1. & 4. & 1. &    & 1. \\
         & 1. & 3. & 2.      \\
         &    & 2. & 0. &    \\
         & 1. &    &    & 2.
   \end{array}\right)

and then solve for the right-hand side

.. math::

   B = \left(\begin{array}{c}
      4.    \\
      17.   \\
      19.   \\
      6.    \\
      12.
   \end{array}\right).

The following code may be used.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/Fortran/ssids.f90
   :language: Fortran


This produces the following output:

::

     Warning from ssids_analyse. Warning flag =   4
     one or more diagonal entries is missing

     The computed solution is:
      1.0000000000E+00  2.0000000000E+00  3.0000000000E+00
      4.0000000000E+00  5.0000000000E+00
     Pivot order:   4    5   -2   -1    3

======
Method
======

:f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` and :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`
-------------------------------------------------------------

If check is set to .true. on the call to :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` or if
:f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()` is called, the user-supplied matrix data is
checked for errors. The cleaned integer matrix data (duplicates are
summed and out-of-range indices discarded) is stored in akeep. The use
of checking is optional on a call to :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` as it incurs both
time and memory overheads. However, it is recommended since the
behaviour of the other routines in the package is unpredictable if
duplicates and/or out-of-range variable indices are entered.

If the user has supplied an elimination order it is checked for errors.
Otherwise, an elimination order is generated by the package. The
elimination order is used to construct an assembly tree. On exit from
:f:subr:`ssids_analyse()` (and :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`), order(:) is
set so that order(i) holds the position of variable :math:`i` in the elimination
order. If an ordering was supplied by the user, this order may differ,
but will be equivalent in terms of fill-in.

:f:subr:`ssids_factor()`
------------------------

:f:subr:`ssids_factor()` optionally computes a scaling and then performs the
numerical factorization. The user must specify whether or not the matrix
is positive definite. If posdef is set to .true., no pivoting is
performed and the computation will terminate with an error if a
non-positive pivot is encountered.

The factorization uses the assembly tree that was set up by the analyse
phase. At each node, entries from :math:`A` and, if it is not a leaf
node, the generated elements and any delayed pivots from its child nodes
must be assembled. Separate kernels handle each of these.

The kernel that performs the assembly from the child nodes considers one
parent-child assembly at a time. Each generated element from a child is
divided into a number of tiles, and a thread block launched to assemble
each tile into a dense submatrix using a simple mapping array to
determine the destination row and column of each entry.
Bit-compatibility is achieved by ensuring the child entries are always
assembled in the same order.

A dense partial factorization of the fully summed columns is then
performed. The fully summed columns are split into a number of tiles
that are each handled by an associated block. Factorization proceeds one
column of tiles at a time. The pivoting condition is chosen to ensure
that all entries of :math:`L` have absolute value less than
:math:`u^{-1}`. This limits the growth of the entries of the
:math:`D` factor and ensures that any solves will be backwards stable.
The details are described in [1]_.

If a pivot candidate does not pass the pivot tests at a node, it is
delayed to its parent node, where further elimination operations may
make it acceptable. Delaying pivots leads to additional fill-in and
floating-point operations beyond that predicted by :f:subr:`ssids_analyse()`
(or :f:subr:`ssids_analyse_coord()`), and may result in additional memory
allocations being required. The number of delayed pivots can often be
reduced by using appropriate scaling.

At each non-root node, the majority of the floating-point operations
involve the formation of the generated element. This is handled by a
single dedicated kernel; again, see [1]_ for details.

At the end of the factorization, data structures for use in future calls
to :f:subr:`ssids_solve()` are prepared. If ``options%presolve=1``, the block
of :math:`L` corresponding to the eliminated variables is explicitly
inverted to accelerate future calls to :f:subr:`ssids_solve()` at the cost of
making :f:subr:`ssids_factor()` slower.

f:subr:`ssids_solve()`
----------------------

If ``options%use_gpu_solve=.false.``, data is moved to
the CPU if required and the BLAS calls are used to perform a solve using
the assembly tree and factors generated on previous calls.

Otherwise, the solve is conducted on the GPU in a similar fashion. If
``options%presolve=0``, custom GPU implementations of ``_trsv()`` and
``_gemv()`` are used to handle multiple independent operations. If
multiple right-hand sides are to be solved for, the single right-hand
side solve is looped over. If ``options%presolve=1``, ``_trsv()`` can be
replaced by the much more parallel (and hence faster) ``_gemv()``. In
this case multiple right-hand sides are handled at the same time.

References
----------

.. [1] J.D. Hogg, E. Ovtchinnikov and J.A. Scott. (2014).
   A sparse symmetric indefinite direct solver for GPU architectures.
   RAL Technical Report. RAL-P-2014-0xx, to appear.
