************
Installation
************

Building with Meson:
====================
We now support building with the `Meson Build system <https://mesonbuild.com>`_.
Under Linux, or macOS, or Windows:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Setup SPRAL
   meson setup builddir -Dexamples=true -Dtests=true -Dlibblas=openblas -Dliblapack=openblas

   # Compile SPRAL
   meson compile -C builddir

   # Install SPRAL
   meson install -C builddir

   # Test SPRAL
   meson test -C builddir

Options to ``meson``
--------------------
In particular, the following options may be of interest:

* ``--prefix=PREFIX`` specifies the installation path prefix (by default
  ``/usr/local/`` under Linux).
* ``-Dtests=true`` whether to generate the tests.
* ``-Dlibblas=blas`` BLAS library against which to link.
* ``-Dliblapack=lapack`` LAPACK library against which to link.
* ``-Dlibhwloc=hwloc`` HWLOC library against which to link.
* ``-Dlibmetis=metis`` METIS library against which to link.
* ``-Dlibmetis_version=5`` Version of the METIS library to use.
* ``-Dmetis64=true`` option to use METIS compiled with 64bit integer support.

For more options (including how to specify paths to the above libraries) please see ``meson_options.txt``.

Building with Autotools:
========================
Under Linux, or macOS:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Get latest development version from github and run dev scripts
   git clone --depth=1 https://github.com/ralna/spral.git
   cd spral
   ./autogen.sh

   # Build and install library
   BUILDDIR=build; mkdir $BUILDDIR; cd $BUILDDIR
   cp ../nvcc_arch_sm.c . # If building for GPU
   ../configure --with-metis="-L/path/to/metis -lmetis"
   make
   sudo make install # Optional

   # Link against library
   cd /path/to/your/code
   gfortran -o myprog myobj.o -lspral -lmetis -lblas

Notes
-----
* The above instructions perform an out-of-path build: we recommend you
  change the value of ``$BUILDDIR`` to reflect the compiler used, for
  example ``BUILDDIR=build-gfortran-13.2``.
* The above will build the SPRAL library and a number of driver programs.
  To build the example and test codes, use ``make check``.
* Installation is not required: in many cases it will be sufficient to
  just link against the static library found in the ``.libs``
  subdirectory.

Third-party libraries
---------------------

METIS
^^^^^
Many of our packages use the METIS graph partitioning library to find good
orderings. You can obtain a copy of METIS from
`<http://www.cs.umn.edu/~metis>`_.
We support both version 4 and version 5 (the latter is available under the open
source Apache Licence).
If the METIS library is not available on the default link path, the
``--with-metis`` option to `configure` should be used to specify
how to link against METIS. For example, if ``libmetis.a`` is in the directory
``/usr/local/metis-4.0``, use:

.. code-block:: bash

   ../configure --with-metis="-L/usr/local/metis-4.0 -lmetis"

BLAS
^^^^
Many of our packages require a high performance BLAS library to efficiently
perform dense linear algebra operations. For best performance, please use the
library recommended by your computer manufacturer (normally the Intel MKL).
If this is not available, use an optimized alternative, such as OpenBLAS.
The reference BLAS from netlib are at least an order of magnitude slower than
modern optimized BLAS, and should be avoided. If bit-compatible results are
desired, a bit-compatible BLAS library must be used.

If the BLAS library is not available on the default link path, or if
`configure` detects the wrong BLAS library, the ``--with-blas``
option to `configure` should be used to specify how to link against
the BLAS library. For example, to link against the Intel MKL using the GNU
compiler suite, use:

.. code-block:: bash

   ../configure --with-blas="-L/opt/intel/mkl/lib/intel64 -lmkl_gf_lp64 -lmkl_gnu_thread -lmkl_core"

Compilers and compiler options
------------------------------
If no compiler is specified, `configure` will pick a default
compiler to use. If `configure` cannot find an appropriate compiler, or
you wish to specify a different compiler you can do so by setting the following
variables:

CC
   specifies the C compiler to use.
FC
   specifies the Fortran 90/95/2003/2008/2018 compiler to use.
NVCC
   specifies the CUDA compiler to use.

Additionally, compiler flags can be specified using the following variables:

CFLAGS
   specifies options passed to the C compiler.
FCFLAGS
   specifies options passed to the Fortran compiler

NVCCFLAGS
   specifies options passed to the CUDA compiler.

For example, to compile with ``ifort -g -O3 -ip`` we could use:

.. code-block:: bash

   ../configure FC=ifort FCFLAGS="-g -O3 -ip"

Other options to `configure`
----------------------------

The `configure` script is generated by `autoconf`, and hence
offers many standard options that can be listed using the command
``configure --help``.

In particular, the following options may be of interest:

* ``--prefix=PREFIX`` specifies the installation path prefix (by default
  ``/usr/local/`` under Linux).

Citing SPRAL or SSIDS
=====================
If you write a paper using software from SPRAL, please cite an
appropriate paper (a list can usually be found in the method section of
the user documentation).

    J. Hogg, E. Ovtchinnikov, and J. Scott (2016). A sparse symmetric indefinite direct solver for GPU architectures.
    ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 42(1), 1-25, `<https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/275654>`_

If no paper is listed, a citation of the SPRAL GitHub website should be used, for example:

    SPRAL: an open-source library for sparse linear algebra, Version 2024-05-08, `<http://www.numerical.rl.ac.uk/spral>`_, May 2024.

Support
=======
Feeback may be sent to `hsl@stfc.ac.uk <hsl@stfc.ac.uk>`_ or by filing
an issue on our github: `<https://github.com/ralna/spral/issues>`_.

Licence
=======
Copyright (c) 2014-2023, The Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC)
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
  documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
* Neither the name of the STFC nor the names of its contributors may be
  used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
  specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL STFC BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE
OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
